Welcome to today's bench press session.
We're going to go heavy today. How
heavy? Well, this is where I need to
have a number of options. Mainly because
I don't have a spotter today. When I
want to go for a big single perhaps,
which is what I'm due for, which is 205
kg, I would like to have a good
unrackck. Yeah, I don't know if anyone's
going to come in today. So, if that's
the case, heavy singles out of the
equation. I'm just not going to risk a
self unrackck with 205 kg. For me, it's
just impossible for me to maintain
position with a weight that's that
heavy, right? Um, so therefore, plan B
is I still want it to be a heavy day.
Uh, if you guys saw my last session, I
did two sets of eight on 165 kilograms.
That was my light day. Um, what I
believe to be the heaviest that I'm
willing to do by myself is 180. So, if
no one's here to unrackck, we're going
to go for 180 for four reps will be
good. Uh, that's an improvement on where
I'm at, on where I have been uh,
pressing. So, four reps. If I can do
five, that's a really nice improvement.
I can sit at 180 for three equals 200
for one. So therefore, anything more
than um three reps on 180 is more than
200 kg. Uh and the level that I'd like
to be at is 205 for now. Uh eventually
220. Uh that'll tell me that I'm good
enough to compete in the 100 class in
Australia. Um you know, and go well.
That's not what the rest of them are
doing. Like a few people are doing that,
but I mean like when I compete, I don't
want to just participate. I want to do
well. And 220 is the number. So, the
stepping stone for that is I would love
to be at 205 today. Uh, what does that
look like? That either looks like having
a good unrackckrack and I get 205.
Alternatively, 180 for four. If I get
five reps on uh 180, I'm going to go for
it if it's there. Let's wait and see.
Super setting dumbbells with lap pull
downs up until I get to my first warm-up
weight. And then I just take
uh 20 kg jumps starting at 60. Then 20
kilogram jumps up to whether it's 180
or 205. We'll see. Check out the
equipment. Wrist wraps, elbow sleeves.
These are really soft elbow sleeves. Um
I always train with these on and then I
compete without them and I bench press
equally or more in competition. Uh so I
just like to train with them. Wrist
wraps. I compete with these. They are
allowed. Uh belt. I also compete with
this because it's allowed. Um, but it
doesn't help everybody. I'll tell you
why it helps me for two reasons. When I
do a lot of benching and a lot of
arching, it can aggravate my back. So,
having a
belt, not because arching is bad, right?
So, arching is a natural human movement.
This is called spinal extension and all
um able bodies should be able to do it
without pain. But sometimes when you do
it excessively, it can aggravate that
structure. So I find that when I use a
belt, it allows me to get a lot more
volume in with that position without
pain because it reinforces my brace.
Okay? So touching my abdominal muscles
gives you kinesthetic feedback. So it's
because it's touching you, you know, to
activate those muscles. So it gives me
kinesthetic feedback on which muscles to
use to brace firstly. But then the next
one, um, I want you to have a look at
the way that I do my my pauses on my
bench press. I like to sink the weight
in my chest. So, there's two cho two
choices that people make with
competition bench press. Light pause or
heavy paws where or sink it, whatever
you want to call that. So, in a
powerlifting competition, the ref will
say start. So, then you lower the weight
to your chest and then you've got to
wait till the ref gives the press
command. So, it's not just a touch and
go. So, you know, the normal bench press
that you see in the gym is just straight
up and down. But in a powerlifting
competition, the ref will wait till the
bar is motionless on your chest and then
they'll give you the press command. Now,
the two ways of doing that, as I said, a
light pause, a lot of people like a
light pause for a number of reasons. One
of them is stability and maintaining
tension, right? Uh compared to a heavy
pause, which is what I do. I like to
drop the whole weight on my chest. So
people say you're turning those muscles
off then turning it back on again um is
hard to maintain tension or it's uh
dangerous or whatever it might be. I
think it's not dangerous if you know how
to do it. Um but my dis the disadvantage
of a light pause there's a couple of
them. One of them is you have to hold
with your strength a very heavy one rep
maximal
uh isometric contraction holding that
weight until the ref says press.
Right now, under a one rep max load,
this the press command is basically the
rule is when the bar is motionless. So,
you have to bring it to a complete
standill. So, if you're doing a light
touch and you're not resting it on
anything except for your strength, that
can be really hard to control. And
that's where I find people, they're
shaking for a long time, waiting for the
ref to say press, and they say, "Oh,
it's, you know, he's giving me such a a
long uh pause. He's waiting so long for
the press command." Well, no. you
haven't stabilized the bar. It's not
motionless. So, when I do a heavy sink,
I unload the whole weight. I drop the
whole weight on my chest and it stops.
So, it stops completely and I'm not
using my muscles to hold it there. So,
that's what I prefer. Now, when I hold
when I use a belt for that position, my
um the rigidity of my trunk, it's a lot
firmer. So, the bar won't sink as deep
into my chest. Whereas, when I don't
have a belt, uh it's easier for the bar
to sink a little bit deeper. So that's
my rationale for using a belt. Heavy
paws and also uh you know to decrease
discomfort in my lower back from
arching. All right, let's have a look.
It's hard to tell. Um, but I was letting
go of the weight completely. Like I, of
course, I'm holding on to the bar, but I
de lo the entire weight. It's just
resting on my chest. Uh, you I'm saying
it's hard to tell cuz it's only 60 kg.
It won't sink me that much. But when I
get to my top weight, whatever that
might be today, you'll see it sinks into
my chest. And my goal is to fight back
as hard as possible. So that's why I
drive my heels down. So I'm pushing my
heels downwards. They're not on the
ground. I'm pushing in that direction.
Driving the heels down and pushing my
sternum up as hard as I can to maintain
that rigid trunk so the bar doesn't sink
as far. That's the goal. 20 kilo jumps
today. You know what this is? Salted
water. Um, no coffee today. I mean, I've
had coffee, but it's a public holiday.
It's Anzac
Day. Uh, and all of the shops are
closed, so that includes my local
barista. So, therefore, it's fine. I
don't rely on my caffeine. I've already
had a number of coffees. Okay, 80 kg.
So, we're going up in 20 kilo jumps.
Oh my god.
One option is if you're going to
unrackck for me, maybe it'll be easier
and I would have gone for a 205, but
still I don't want to not be there. So,
the next alternative was to go 180 for
reps. So, four reps is good. That's an
improvement and I'm happy. Five reps is
where I believe I should be. Except,
damn, my shoulders and arms are killing
from all the heavy squats that I've been
doing. Are you recording this? So, my
squats, it's a really hard thing to
balance your your low bar squat training
with your bench press training. Um,
because I do quite an aggressive
position with my low bar squat. And the
next day and two days after, my arms, my
elbows, my biceps are in a fair bit of
pain. uh they feel okay now but then
when I get to the heavy weights
uh it hurts and the biggest
indicator like you know pain's fine it's
like I know it's not injury pain it's
just discomfort and I'm happy to work
through that but
sometimes it's not up to you and the
biggest indicator that you'll see um is
when there's still kind of like residual
pain from my squats I lower the weight
too slowly
Right? Because it hurts. It's
like, but that's only for the first rep.
It's slow and then it's whack, whack,
whack. So, when I do a slow eccentric uh
for the first rep, that's usually
because there's discomfort in my arms.
So, at this weight, I can't tell. Um
either way, I'm going to get Denny
uh to unrackck. Now, come and check out
Denny Jade. You'll notice something
different about her.
you'll notice something different about
her compared to like how she normally
is. So, a lot of people say, "Oh, what's
she going to do when she unrackcks for
you?" Uh, and I've got uh one of the
first pinned posts on my on my page is
her saving me. I went for 200 kg for two
reps, got the first, came down for the
second, and then done. And she came and
stepped in and and unrackcked. She
helped me back up with 200 kg. So, she's
good enough. She knows what she's doing,
right? It's technique as well as
strength. She's very strong. Um, but is
there a difference now that she's 8
months pregnant?
Almost n like she's nearly full term.
Nearly full term and I'm going to put
her under this much pressure to unrackck
for me. Damn. Let's see. I don't know. I
don't know. No
pressure. No pressure, Diane Jay. But
anyway, look at this. I've still got the
safeties on. I've still got the face
savers. So, um, if if it doesn't go to
plan, it's it's all good. All right. Uh,
let's Normally I wouldn't get her to
unrackck for this weight, but she hasn't
unrackcked for me for a while. Um, and
it's just about getting in the groove
again. Um, she's very good at it, but
she's been unrackcking other people. And
other people bench differently. So, it's
a matter of kind of like just
readjusting. So, although I don't need
it for this weight, typically I'd like
it for the next weight, it's just
getting her to fi like familiarize
herself with my technique again. All
right, let's check it.
Yeah, good one. I got to say it's
definitely nicer when I don't have to
that that
part that part here is the uncomfortable
part. Like once it's here, it's it's a
lot easier. Like you're in the right
position. You know, you're stacked. It's
it's the the strong position. Back here,
it's not strong. So, having to unrackck
for yourself. Uh I've been used to doing
it for the last few sessions, but now
when she just did that, it's just like
the hard part's done. So, hopefully
it's okay. Hopefully, we're off to a
good start. So, we did two or five.
So, I know I said at the start of the
video that if I had a good unrackckrack,
I'm going to go for 205. Uh, but in that
time, I sold myself on the idea of doing
the rep work. Uh, so when you set it
right now, 205, it's like, you know
what, 180 for four or even five if it's
there, in my opinion, is better for my
long-term strength. So, testing strength
and building strength aren't necessarily
the same thing. So doing a one rep max
um is is important to practice the skill
of doing one rep max, but it's
objectively
um not enough volume to build as much
strength as when you do the rep work.
It's also a higher risk of injury. Uh
which I don't right I don't need right
now. Um I'm not competing. So to do a
one rep max when
I'm not like 100% just feeling perfect,
it's just no point.
Lovely. Good one.
It's so much easier to warm up for a
bench press than squats. So, I got two
more sets to go. You know what I mean?
like 160 is the last warm up and then we
go.
Um, so much easier, don't you think? And
it's quicker to do as well. You're just
in and out. 60 80. Yeah. So, same
increments. You know, I've done a whole
bunch of dumbbell work and and lat pull
downs for my warm-ups. So, you know,
I've done the same amount of sets
really, but man, it's just way easier.
Here's the thing with my program. I'm
on. It's kind of like an 8week block,
but it looks like this. It's weekly
undulating. So, the way that I do weekly
undulating programs is I essentially get
a four-week program of heavy and a
four-week program of light and I mash
them in like that. So, it's 8 weeks. So,
I'm essentially running an 8week program
where it's heavy, light, heavy, light,
heavy, light for 8 weeks. Um, and I
believe I'm pretty much kind of like
week five or week six. So yeah, I'm
going to keep on doing that for the next
yeah, two to two to three more weeks.
And this is where I want to be doing
things like at the end of this is where
I'll want to do a 300 kilo squat as well
as a, you know, 205 kilo bench press,
you know, within that time period. And
then I will be changing my program. So
when I get to those numbers, I didn't
say if. When I get to those numbers,
that's when I'm going to commit to a a
comp.
Well, actually, I'm going to test my
deadlift. So, this is what I want.
Ready, Denny? In training, 300 squat
with sleeves, 310 deadlift, and a 205
bench. Once I'm there, I can see the
finish line, and that's when I'll say
I'm going to start looking around
Australia to see when the next
competitions on. There's always comps
on. That could all be done in the next 2
to 3 weeks. So, if that's the case, then
I'll say, great. I reckon I'll be
looking for a competition at around 12
weeks after that. And that'll give me an
opportunity to add a little bit more to
those numbers, which will be a great
total. My best total in the one. So,
I've only competed in the 100 kilo class
once with knee wraps and I totaled 840.
Well, I'd like to beat that with sleeves
and at a much older age. So, that'll be
me at 43 years old. So, when I when I
did that at the 100 kilo class with
reps, it would have been about 8 years
ago. I squatted 310, benched 220, and
deadlifted 310. Yeah, I think I can get
a 310 deadlift next week. So, um,
numbers. Yeah, big numbers and and all
achievable. So, that would be the goal
is to beat myself. My last record was
840. It would be to beat that but with
sleeves and uh and uh 43
Rob. All right, last warm up. Bing
record.
Easy.
Nice.
Beautiful. Good one. Isn't it funny? So,
yeah, I can definitely feel it on my
shoulders from the squats. Uh, as you
can see when I lower it really slowly,
but then it just goes
Hey.
Yeah, it was all good. It was all good.
Georgie
forward. But if I get five, I'm even
happier. And I think I can. I want five.
Yeah, boy. Get it. Yeah. All right. All
right. Mate, good one. That was easy.
Yeah, we're happy. That was one set and
done. Thank you, bro. One set and done.
I was going to call that and then I
Yeah. Well, you know, I knew I knew it
was there. I knew it was there. Thanks,
bro. He wasn't even watching,
dog. Dog. I got it. I got
it. Okay. So, what does that mean for my
strength? It means mate could have had
205, but I'm glad I like didn't go for
205 because it's not feeling amazing
coming down. It's like it's just
uncomfortable. But look at the speed on
the way
up. Yeah. So, there was, you know, it's
funny because let's talk a bit about
reps in reserve and RP. So, a lot of
people say 10 RP is zero reps in
reserve. 9 RP, one rep in reserve. I
call that a 9 RP, but I don't think I
had a rep in reserve.
You may disagree because I know how it
looks with me. It looks fast and it's
like you had more reps in there, but I
can't move slowly with this. When I'm
maxing out, it's fast or
nothing. And then I miss it. It's like,
how the hell did that happen? I thought
you had way more. So, I don't believe I
had six then, even though the fifth leg
looked pretty comfortable. So, 9 RP. So,
I felt really comfortable, but I didn't
have a sixth. Uh but when it's a
strength protocol, you want to keep the
weight, you know, upwards of of 75% and
even upwards of
80%. Right? So, so when it's strength
training, you want to so 80% of uh 200
kg is 160 kg. So that means if I do back
down work, it has to be a minimum of 160
kg. um you know and then the next thing
is well if you go lighter than that uh
that's great for building muscle mass
which is also important. Now here's the
problem at a high
level those are two conflicting
modalities. So if you have a focus on
purely building muscle um you need a lot
of volume and that can fatigue you for
purely building strength which is why
strength programs typically have much
lower volume. Um, then we've got
concurrent training methods, right? So,
uh, something you may have heard of,
which I love, is power building, right?
Which is where you, you know, you come
into the session, you do your skill work
at the start, you go really heavy with
your powerlifting movements, and then
you do bodybuilding style training after
that. Love that style of training, and
you can get bigger and stronger by doing
that. But I'll tell you now, at the top
top top top level, approaching
competition, like I could do that now
cuz I'm not really peing yet. Um, but
approaching competition, you don't want
to be doing that because that's too much
volume to be able to recover from. So
that's where, you know, you want to do
all, you know, you want to keep building
muscle and keep building strength.
That's when you keep coming in and
retesting your max and it's just not
getting stronger for some reason. Well,
that reason is because you're chasing
too much hypertrophy. It's doing too
much volume and the fatigue is masking
the fitness. So therefore,
powerbuilding, excellent. beginner to
intermediate respond very very very well
to doing multiple uh modalities
simultaneously but at the highest level
you want to specialize. So the power
lifters out there if you're an elite
lifter um yeah separate those blocks so
you do a hypertrophy block first by
itself then we do a strength block as we
uh approach competition. Can it be vice
versa? Like yeah, you do a lot of volume
and then you accumulate a lot of
fatigue, you don't do enough volume, so
you don't build enough muscle. Yeah,
that's the problem with periodization,
right? And this is where everyone has a
bit of beef with periodization is when
you focus on one physical quality at a
time, that means you're spending that
much time away from those other physical
qualities. So that's definitely one of
the negatives of specializing. So if I
do that and peak for competition, the
last month, that's why you don't want to
do it for longer than a month. So the
last month, if you try and peak for too
long and you're reducing the volume for
too long, you will lose muscle
mass. Okay? You'll train your nervous
system um to to be skillful, to be
strong, to recruit maximum motor units
and to lift a heavy weight for your
size. So that's called neural
adaptations. But you will lose the
cellular adaptations. those cellular
adaptations is, you know, the increase
in muscle mass. So that's why the peak
isn't longer. Uh when I said the
stronger you are, the longer the peak, I
was saying 3 weeks, right? 3 4 weeks at
the highest level. Don't go longer than
that because you're going to be spending
too much time away from from uh um the
volume work that is responsible for
building the quality muscle mass. So uh
here's a really successful training
strategy that I like to do all year
round. This was introduced to me by uh
one of my early mentors Charles
Polloquin. Uh he likes to train not
always but with a lot of his uh
programming monthly undulating
periodization uh which is where you
alternate between high volume phase
which is muscle building or you can call
that the accumulation phase uh and then
you you go from there to the
intensification phase which is lower
volume and heavy loads. So you go phase
of building muscle and then you switch
to a phase of building strength, then
back to building muscle, back to
building strength. So what happens there
is you're spending kind of like four
weeks on each quality. That's great to
build that quality and it's not too much
time away from the other physical
qualities. Um so you kind of you know as
opposed to more traditional
periodization, right? also known as
linear periodization where you go start
of the long-term plan highest volume and
gradually over the course of the
long-term plan we're reducing the volume
so that we can gradually increase the
intensity. So that's when you're
spending way too much time away from
these uh modalities and that's when you
drain those physical qualities. Um so
I'm not saying that linear is bad. I'm
just saying that's one of the negatives
to linear. Okay. So monthly undulating
also has its negatives. Um, all styles
of pudization have their negatives.
There's nothing that's perfect. Uh, and
if I told you a training style that uh
that I tried to do, I'm sure you'll
you'll find flaws in it. And that's just
how it goes. And that's all you're
trying to do is continually refine um,
you know, the algorithm, the neverending
algorithm of strength. Uh, and once you
think you've refined it, your body
adapts to it and you have to do
something else. Uh, so actually that's
the challenging part, but it's also the
fun part. It keeps you guessing, keeps
you thinking. Um, you know, you can't
just keep on doing the same program over
and over and keep expecting the same
result. Okay, the law of diminishing
returns applies. All right, next. What's
next? Uh, we're going to do accessories.
So, I've decided I'm not going to do
more bench work. I've kind of maxed out
on that. So, anything else that I do
after that is kind of
like pointless. It's junk volume, right?
I did, you know, a really good set of
five. Uh, we're done. We're done. I'm
going to do more benching in the week.
That did not make me weaker. So, now I'm
going to go straight to accessories. Uh,
and a good accessory that I like to do,
um, that I'm going to be doing less of
as I get closer to competition. Sorry,
excuse you. Uh, a good accessory that I
like to always keep strong is my
vertical pushing strength. Um, so that's
um, you know, seated dumbbell shoulder
press. One of my favorite exercises.
I've got really strong shoulders. I
using this one, didn't I'll use this one
next, too. Seated shoulder press. Seated
shoulder press.
Now, this is something. So, when it
comes to long-term planning, further
away from competition, you want more
variation. Closer to competition, you
want more specificity, right? Because if
you keep doing lots and lots of
variation, as you get close to
competition day, uh that's also
accumulating volume in an area that you
don't need it, right? So, that's the
idea. As you're further away from
competition, you want to do more
variation. So, that's me now. I don't
have a competition insight. So, I want
to keep my my vertical pressing strength
high because as I get closer to the
competition, that's a a plane of
movement that I'm going to be
neglecting. So, as I get closer to
competition, it's all going to be, you
know, so much specificity on bench
press. Um, that I'm going to be spending
a lot of time away from the vertical
push plane. But, if I get it strong
enough now, it won't matter. Okay. So,
uh, Denny Jay is going to do some
shoulder pressing with
me. And, um, you going to do shoulder
press? You want to do a shoulder press?
Good one.
Some rows. I'll do some uh rows. What
type of rows? You're doing dumbbell.
I'm going to do cable. It's easier.
You'll do it with me. You have to warm
up again.
Look, I'm not doing a, you know, heavy
heavy day. It's rep work. I don't need
to I'm warm, right? So, normally I like
to recommend do a a feel set. Uh, but I
don't think, you know, my heaviest
shoulder press that I did recently was
60 kg. I don't want to go to 60 right
now. Um, I think I'll be able to do 50
and I don't need to rewarm up. So, 150
kg bench press. My shoulders are in the
right position to um to rep out a couple
of sets of 50 kg dumbbells. So, let's do
that. Yeah.
We'll do one more set. Okay. Next
programming strategy is supersetting.
That's what we're going to do now. Um,
when it comes to supersets, there's two
different types. Same muscle supersets,
which is where you do, you know, the
shoulder press straight into another,
you know,
uh, back down exercise that targets the
same muscle areas. That is if your goal
is muscle hypertrophy. My goal is
strength. So that's the next strategy
for supersetting. It's opposing or
non-over overlapping muscle supersets.
So this is where I like to do a push
with a pull or agonist antagonist. Uh so
our next exercise is going to be uh the
seated row. So the reason why that's a
very effective strategy is because my
push muscles are fatigued and I can sit
here and rest for five minutes before I
do another set or in that time I can do
the opposing muscles which I didn't use.
So, that's any of the pulling patterns,
whether it's rows or pull pull-ups or
pull downs. Now, here's the next
question. Why didn't I do that for my
bench press? Well, you can, but my
recommendation when you get to a high
level, if you're going for something
really big, I said it's non-over
overlapping muscles, so it's they don't
kind of compete for recovery or or
fatigue. Um, when it comes to really
really heavy lifting, there is central
fatigue. So even though I'm not lift
using the same muscles at the highest
level, if I was to do rows or something
like that in between, it would fatigue
me and negatively impact my top set. So
program for the day is heavy heavy bench
standalone exercise and then we do uh
push pull. These are lighter exercises.
You know, I'm doing sets of 10 here. I
don't need to really it's not maxing out
or anything like that. So I don't need
optimal optimal energy levels to be able
to perform multiple sets of that. Um,
next thing avoiding training redundancy.
So I did bench press which is horizontal
push playing with a barbell. That's the
primary exercise, the exercise that has
the highest relevance to achieving your
goal. That's what you do first when you
have the most energy and that's where
you get the best results. Don't do your
most relevant exercise when you're
fatigued, right? Do it when you're
fresh. Secondary exercise, the joint
angles and ranges of motion you've
neglected in the main movement. Okay? So
what's one joint angle that I've
neglected? Okay, with a bench press with
an arch, it's a partial range of motion.
So, when we do the dumbbells, it allows
you to take the shoulder joint through a
longer range of motion. I don't want to
neglect any range of motion. I want to
take my shoulder joint under load. So,
strengthen my every joint through the
fullest range of motion. That's how you
have healthy joints. Okay? So, that's
one range of motion that we neglected is
a is a full stretch. And then the next
one is, you know, that was horizontal
push plane. So, now we do vertical push
plane. So, they are non-over overlapping
exercises. They're not I'm I'm factoring
in avoiding exercise redundancy. Um and
uh yeah, let's go and do a pull pattern.
You're going to come and do some rows
with me, didn't
you? Pre-exhaustion.
Pre-exhaustion. Now, that's another
hypertrophy um
strategy. Don't do that for strength,
right? So pre-exhaustion would be
something like before my bench press, I
do a few sets of like pec deck or cable
flies or dumbbell flies, something like
an isolation exercise that pre-exhausts
the target
muscles. And then you come into the
bench press and it's a lot harder
because your pecs are
fatigued. That's a strategy for
bodybuilding which you know it's
debatable if it's better or not. Some
people say it is better, some people say
it's not better.
I say I prefer not to do it because even
if my goal was bodybuilding, I have my
bias towards performance. So if I was a
bodybuilder, I would still be and this
is what I recommend to all bodybuilders
that you factor it in. You're train you
factor your training in like it's a
performance sport. You are performing
and you want to be performing at a high
level. Um you know not giving yourself a
disadvantage by starting your set in a
fatigued state. Uh, so some people see
advantages. Of course there are
advantages, but my bias says I want to
perform. Even if it's um with a
bodybuilding goal, so I don't do pre-
fatigue. But if you want to, you're not
a bad person. You
are. I got my bro here. So we're doing a
bro session now. So what we're doing is
two different types of pull patterns.
They're both very good. Hers is going to
be more lat dominant. Okay. So this is a
bit of a a lat row inspired by my dear
friend, the late Andrew Lock. May he
rest in peace. Um it's the lock lat row
the way that he does it. So if you think
of the function of the lat um there are
a number of functions. The main ones are
shoulder joint extension, shoulder joint
adduction and lateral flexion of the
trunk. Okay. So what we're doing here,
the goal here is get take the lat
through the full stretch. Now when she
brings it down, she wants to pull her
her elbow just to her her pelvis here.
So not pulling it behind. So when she
pulls it behind, that's the midback
muscles taking over, right? So the focus
is to target the lats by bringing it
just to the midline or just to the
pelvis. Now watch her do a bit of a
lateral flexion or side crunch, which
really finalizes that shortened position
of lats. So we're taking from the
longest position to the full contracted
position. It's a great exercise to
really feel what it feels like to use
the lats. So, I've had a few people ask
me questions. Um, what if I do a lat
pull down and I don't feel my lats? This
is where you can do an exercise like
this and you've got no choice but to
feel those lats. This is where you feel
the greatest lat contraction in my
opinion of all exercises. Full stretch,
elbow to pelvis, and and little bit of a
side flexion while you do
that. Good one. And you know, you can do
this standing, but when you're standing,
you aren't able to lift as heavy. Uh, so
when you have a bench here, uh, Dinn's
got a bit of a belly here, so you don't
want to be with with Dinny. She's
holding on to the bench here, so she's
creating space so that she's not
squashing a baby. Uh, but that extra bit
of stability that she has there, uh,
allows her to shift heavier weight. So
that's why, uh, if I was to do it, I I'd
probably, you know, I'd
I'd be flat here.
And I'd want to lean a bit further back
cuz that's
touching. Okay. But it's the same
thing. But I don't really care for
targeting lats by itself or in
isolation. I like to have more complete.
So, um, you know, you can do it on a lat
pull down or a seated row, but I do like
to pull my elbows behind my midline and
pull my shoulder blades together. So
that's targeting the midback muscles
which are, you know, good muscles to be
strong. So full stretch, shoulders back
and down. Full stretch, shoulders back
and
down. So yes, this is lats, but it's
also midback. It's not as lat focused as
what Denny's doing.
Well, what I'm doing now is I'm taking
my thoracic spine into a more rounded
position. So, that's my upper back is
rounding my lower back. I don't want to
kind of like lose the brace in my lower
back. That's irrelevant. That's where
I'm just using momentum. This part here,
that's not the muscles that I'm
targeting. So, I want to brace my lower
back and I can round my upper
back to take the scapula, my shoulder
blade, through the fullest range of
motion. Okay? So scapular protraction is
paired with So protraction is where the
shoulder blades come forward like this
or slide around the rib cage. That's
protraction. Retraction is the opposite
direction. Now watch this. Retraction is
paired with arching your upper back or
in other words thoracic extension.
Protraction is paired with thoracic
flexion. So if you keep a really rigid
spine, you're not able to protract as
much as you can as if you flex your
upper back. Do you see that extra range
of motion? So, this is a really rigid
upper
back. Rounding my upper back, of course,
it's safe. Allows for greater range of
motion in scapular protraction, which
means my midback muscles take them to a
longer stretch and a longer overall
range of motion. So, you know, you see
Arnold Schwarzenegger
uh in in pumping iron. He does his rows
all the way, all the way, all the way.
He's not a bad person. He's Arnold
Schwarzenegger of course but objectively
what's happening this bit of range of
motion at the hips that's not upper back
that's that's lower back right so if you
want to strengthen erectus spine a you
should do that but objectively that's
increasing the momentum uh which
decreases the effectiveness of uh the
upper back. So for bodybuilding
exercises you want to isolate that area
as much as possible. For strength
exercises, you want to put as many of
your muscles and body into that exercise
as possible. The problem with that is uh
we've now lost track of which muscle
we're targeting, which muscle are we
trying to grow. Uh so here the muscles
that I want to grow are lats and midback
muscles, a little bit of rear delt as
well. And let's have a look at the
technique from start to finish.
So rigid lower back, full stretch in the
upper back, and retract and depress the
scapula. Full
stretch, little bit of movement, small
bit of momentum, but not a
lot. And if the technique is not
perfect, you're not a bad person. In
fact, if you try and get your technique
too perfect, you're probably missing out
on the hard work that's required for
building
muscle. Oh
man, good one.
Good one. See how there's not a huge
amount of retraction of the scapula when
she does it because she's pulling Pull
your elbow back further and squeeze your
shoulder blades back. So now that's more
midback when she when you see those
muscles pop up because she's pulling her
elbow behind the midline of her body and
that retracts the scapula which means
we're now including these muscles here.
And the moment she takes her elbow
beyond here, the lats lose their line of
pull. So, doesn't mean there's no more
lats, just means they're not as active
at that point. So, it becomes more of a
general exercise for lats and midback.
But the way that she's doing it to the
hip is more focused on the lat.
Come on.
Yeah.
You like that? You like that?
Yeah. you know. Yeah, thanks. Thanks for
noticing. I'm glad you asked. How do I
get those rear delts? Yeah, I guess
there's a lot of genetics that come into
that. I've, you know, of course I've
done rear delt work in my training. Um,
but whenever I do my rows, pulls pull
downs, my rear delts just get jacked.
It's just the way that I move. When I
move my shoulders through that full
range of motion that I just showed you,
it hits all of those muscles. So, it's
just an accumulation of 20 years of
doing rows, pull-ups, pull downs, the
way that I do it. I was going to say the
right way. I do think it's the right
way. That's why I do it that way. Uh,
but some people, they do their rows,
their shoulders move slightly
differently to mine. They get these
funky actions. Those are typically
people that don't have big jack rear
delts. So, uh, yeah, I would say
genetics as well as an understanding of
moving the way that I'm explaining to
you allows me to strengthen all of those
muscles. red delts, midback muscles,
which is my traps and romboids, and lats
as well. One more set of presses.
I'll just do a sneak peek.
So, I'll tell you why. I'll tell you
why. So, this is where from an absolute
load perspective, this is the rule. The
heavier the weight, the longer the
recovery. All right? So, I'm not saying
she's incapable or anything like that um
of lifting heavy weights. She's very
strong,
but you know, when we talk about rest
periods, so Denny's pretty much doing a
press. She's lifted. She's pregnant as
well. She's lifting submaximal. You
know, you're not going to see her
grunting and doing all of that stuff
because she's uh using a very low RP.
So, this is one of our recommendations
for the pregnant mas out there. Um what
her body's able to do during pregnancy.
Um here's one pretty simple thing.
pretty much
everything you know but lower the
intensity right so these are the things
that we don't do during pregnancy and
it's not researchbacked okay we don't
use a belt we don't do breath hold and
we don't take any of the movements to
fail so like I said it's not
researchbacked so people are now saying
there's no research that says that
breath hold during pregnancy um changes
much or or has any negative impact on
the baby that's fine that's great uh I
hope it doesn't but at the same time.
Um, Denny knows her limitations. She's
very strong and she's that's the rule
that we've gone by is uh reduce the
RP. Don't go to fail. Don't hold the
breath. And she's been able to train.
So, she's Yeah. Almost 9 months
pregnant. 38 weeks. She's She's 38 weeks
pregnant. And she moves
around like if it wasn't for her belly.
The way that she moves around is like
she's not even pregnant, you know? Then
she moves to the side. It's like, "Oh,
you got a big gut. what happened? What
happened to you there? Uh but you know,
that's that's the reality of it and
that's the beauty of strength training
through pregnancy um the right way,
which is like she's not going to break
records now. Her goal is not to break
records. Her goal is to just stay strong
enough to maintain the, you know, the
strength that she's trained for her
whole damn life. Like, why lose it? You
know, there's one thing baby and to
birth the baby to walk out unscathed as
poss as unscathed un as unscathed as
possible after after child birth. Uh,
you know, and just hope for the best.
But a strong body is going to be a very
good advantage going into Labor Day. All
right. The baby's going to like huge
muscles. The baby hopefully hopefully
will have massive biceps,
um, massive quadriceps. Yeah. Hopefully
massive glutes. Yeah. Chunky.
2 by 10. That was definitely reps in
reserve. You know, not much, but it's
like still hard. Like, I'm tired.
Anyway, one more set of rows. Let's go.
You know what? I've
decided bodybuilding makes your face
uglier than strength
training. Yeah. So that's an observation
of mine based on feel and observation.
So when I lift a heavy weight for less
than five reps, I hold my breath. I
don't make noise. My my the pressure
build up in my head makes my face go.
But there's not much change like in
terms of the muscles that I'm using in
my face. But watch the best bodybuilders
in the world. And I noticed I'm not
calling myself the best bodybuilder, but
I noticed myself wanting to do that when
I'm doing high rep work. That's when you
hit grunting. It's like hypertrophy. You
want to take the movement as close to
fail as possible. So it's like how close
to fail until it starts hurting. Like
pretty far away. Like if you're doing a
set of 15, rep 10 is pretty hard, right?
So what you're going to see these
bodybuilders doing is like
this, how do they do
it? Right? They they screw their face
up. This is what I've noticed, right?
they they screw their face up
and you know and I I'm telling you now
that I started noticing okay like the
the muscles on a lot of pro bodybuilders
faces they're very like very thick deep
lines and it's not because they're so
wrinkly it's because actually their
faces have developed muscles that form
those big deep lines. Yeah. So, if you
want to be beautiful, uh, be do strength
training. Don't be a bodybuilder. Be a
strength athlete
or get some Botox. I don't know how many
highle bodybuilders get Botox. I think
it's going to fix Botox. Well, Botox
numb the muscles. They paralyze the
muscles from working. Yeah. So that's
I'm telling you that would work because
hey bodybuilders out there honestly if
you don't want to be ugly if you don't
want to be if you don't want to be
uglier Botox your face and then train
and then train and then you just go
like this is
hard. Yeah. But it's either that or have
have those muscles in your face like you
know who like Dorian Dorian Yates. Love
you, Dorian.
His his face is very thick and muscular
and it's like, yeah, I've noticed a lot
of bodybuilders have the same
muscularity on their faces like Dorian
Yates. Well, maybe that's why I still
look pretty. Because you're Botox. Yeah.
Or you've been training like a strength
athlete and not a bodybuilder, we could
say.
So much hate. I'm going to get so much
hate from the bodybuilders. No, so much
hate. Listen. Listen. The bodybuilders
deep down know what I'm saying. You know
that face, you pull. And I'm telling you
now, you do that over and over again for
10 years, 20 years, you're going to
build muscles in that position. You know
how your mom said, uh, your face is
going to change in the wind? Oh my god.
Yeah. She told me, she say, it's true.
It's true, but it just takes years, but
it also
takes a lot of repetitions.
You guys get value, so much value from
me. I should be charging you for this.
So, the bodybuilders, they may hate it
because you know why? Because truth
hurts. I swear they're going to go back
and look at their face on their videos.
Go back and look at your face when
you're reaching failure on your videos.
Complex. Let's go do and they're going
to look like that.
[Music]
All right, we're going to do some um
we're going to do some guns. Get the
Huns. All right, so guns is biceps and
triceps. So, that's easy.
So, if you were following, I gave you
guys the perfect upper body day. The
perfect upper body was uh for shoulder
based. So, it's a lot of push and pull.
So, we did, you know, like overhead
presses, uh shoulder work, face pulls,
shoulder health, but we neglected the
arms. So, that's what I promised you
guys on the secondary day, which is my
heavy day. I'm going to incorporate some
arms. So, we're going to do some
um start with some triceps. You know
what I'm going to do, D? I'm going to do
C cable press downs.
You know, my last phase I was doing uh
easy bar skull crushes, which are my
favorite exercise, but I'll tell you
now, I'm tired,
man. All right. I was going to do I was
going to do half of the stack, but uh
Denny's spotting me. Uh so I'm going to
do the whole stack. Uh okay. You ready,
Denny? Let's go. All right, let's do it.
Dy's going to spot me. Ready?
Thanks,
bro. I'll try not to do the You helping?
Are you helping? Thanks,
D. Okay, I bro.
Hey, you ready for the bodybuilder
phase? So, this is where it starts
hurting.
[Applause]
Thanks, bro. Full stack. 91. Yeah, I was
going to do half the stack, but because
you spotted 91. She spotted me. Is that
91? Can we get it to 100? Well, we got
those ones as well. 91 2.
Damn, that's rude. That's can't do 100.
Uh, what would you like there?
Leave it on. Leave it on.
That's a too easy. Yeah. Yeah.
Two more. Yeah.
Still too easy.
One more.
I'll do half a stack.
She's such a full of [__] She goes,
"All right, I'll do half a stack." It's
not half a stack,
huh? Almost half a
stack. It's like,
huh?
I'm just helping her. This is how you
spot a tricep. Press down. You going to
do ugly face?
She's got She got Botox.
My guts are in the way. Her guts are in
the way. But we also don't do 10 RP
whilst pregnant. All right. Next up,
let's do some uh bicep curls. I've got
an idea. I think baby did the face. Baby
did the face on behalf of
Dy. All right, so check this out. This
is what I like to do with my easy bar is
I do scalp press and then I do bicep
curls with the easy
bar. So now I'm going to do the same
thing but with the cables. All right. So
um I'm going to do a mechanical drop
set. So something I like to do for
biceps, well not just biceps, it's
called elbow flexes. In fact, it's
turning the biceps off by pronating. So,
if you're on biceps, you've got to
supenate. So, like straight bar curls,
right? So, what I'm going to do to start
with pronated grip, that's reverse
curls. Great for brachialis,
brachioraiialis, and these forearm
muscles, right? So, good arms isn't just
about the biceps. It's about obviously
triceps, but also forearms as well. So,
check this out. I'll start with
Nice. Come on, bro.
All right. So, then that's a mechanical
drop set. We swap straight
into the stronger position to do more.
So now it's more biceps because we
supernated our wrist.
Huh?
No,
that's all of them, bro. That's all of
them. So, look at that. So, now it's a
very good pump, right? You did triceps,
pumped up the
triceps, reverse curls, and supernated
curls.
Then he doesn't really do
arms, which is
okay. Which is okay.
Yeah. Good one. Yeah, that's there. Go
on. That's my biceps. How's the biceps?
Look at the gun
show. Well, the the biceps aren't on.
Remember, we've turned them off by
pronating. Look, not completely. They're
still there somewhat, but just not as
much as when she turns it over and
supernates the
wrist. So, all of the Yeah, pretend that
she did it to fail. So now she
supernates the wrist and now she gets
the biceps, right? So you probably see
it in the video that the biceps are
popping out
more more gun show.
Pow
pow. Denny doesn't know how to do an
ugly face.
Max.
No, it's just a it's expressionless.
Maxing out is pretty expressionless.
It's just breath hold and you go
red red bit of vasc vascularity. You
never done raises. I beg your pardon.
You never I've never done lateral
raises. Look, have you seen my deltoids?
Do you think I've Do you think these
deltoids have never done lateral raises?
Of course I have. Just not on the videos
for you guys. Do you want to do some
lateral raises? Let's do three exercises
back to back.
Hey, look at the this is the thing.
Yeah, you know, I'm only mcking around,
but let me tell you something about
these exercises. See how I'm just going,
"Yeah, let's put them in." I'll tell you
why. Because they're lowcost exercises.
It's like, you know, I'm not going to do
more deadlifts now or big heavy
exercises because that is going to
accumulate my fatigue. So, right now,
these are just party pump exercises.
Make you feel good. Great way to end the
session and they're good exercise. All
right, ready? I'm not going to go heavy.
I'm not going to go heavy. What's your
thoughts on like heavy versus light
raises?
Okay, my thoughts on heavy versus light
dumbbell lateral raises is
not just the dumbbell lateral raise, any
isolation exercise, my recommendation is
to use higher reps. Okay. So now we've
got all of the load is focused on one
joint. It's not spread out evenly over
multiple joints. So big compound
movements like a squat, deadlift,
multiple joints. So they suit lower reps
um and heavier loads. But if you do that
on isolation exercises, it increases the
risk of injury. So uh the next thing is
muscle stimulation. If you try and do
like one to five reps on a dumbbell
lateral raise, like I don't know how you
would do one like anything less than
five reps with appropriate load, it' be
so much like breakdown of technique that
it's not really stimulating the target
muscle with which is the middle head of
the deltoid. Uh so therefore you feel it
yourself. uh you know people say things
like you know the research says anywhere
between five to 30 reps uh gives equal
amount of hypertrophy stimulus as long
as you take that set within close
proximity to
failure. That does not mean go and do
sets of 30 on big squats and deadlifts.
And it doesn't mean go do sets of five
on your little uh isolation exercises
either. Okay, that's the research. So
now you need to make up your mind on
what to do with that information. So,
I'll tell you right now, is here's my
general rule. Isolation exercises, use
higher reps and lower loads, and take
those to fail. Big compound movements,
lower reps, slightly heavier loads. If
your goal is hypertrophy, yeah, take it
to fail. So, I'm going to show you a few
of the cues. Pour the jug of water.
Okay. The next cue that I like to give,
so you're going to you can say lead with
the pinky or lead with the elbow. So,
don't have your thumb up. So, that
points your front deltoid to the sky.
Right? We want to point the middle
deltoid to the sky by internally
rotating. Right? Now the next thing
instead of thinking of lifting the
weight up, think of get that weight and
touch that wall. Get this weight and
touch that wall. So I want to reach out,
not up. Out, not up. Out, not
up. Pouring the jugs.
Yeah. Well, how many reps? I did 100 and
you did like seven or something. 15.
Shush. They can count. Yeah, they can
count. Well, then if you did 15, I must
have done 80. I'm sorry. I wasn't
looking at you. I must have done like
80.
Anyway, all right, that's uh time to go.
That was a good session. We're going to
do another round of the biceps, triceps,
and uh lateral raises. Party pump to
finish the session walk out of here for
the weekend looking jacked to impress
all the boys. Yeah, the girls. Yeah, the
girls don't care. Isn't that funny? I
swear like that's guys go, you know,
you're going to impress all the girls.
Girls don't give a [__] The guys come
up to you and they say, "Sick deltoids,
bro." Anyway, that's what I'm going to
do this weekend. Impress the boys. Uh,
hope you enjoyed today's session. See
you guys next time.